Immunophenotype analysis of 17 childhood medulloblastoma (MED) and supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors (SPNET) was performed on frozen sections using 16 monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) with the biotin-streptavidin alkaline phosphatase immunohistochemical technique. Neuroectodermal associated antigens, reacting with MoAb UJ13/A, UJ127.11, UJ167.11, and UJ223.8 were detected on greater than 10% of the cells in 15 of 17 MED/SPNET. Thy-1 was present on 14 of 17 tumors and absent on two of three SPNET. Neuronal (NF) and glial (GFAP) differentiation markers were evaluated. NF-H was demonstrated in 15 of 17, NF-M in six of 17 and NF-L in one of 17 tumors; GFAP was positive in nine of 17 patients. In nine of 17 MED/SPNET both proteins were present within the same tumor. Common leukocyte antigen was demonstrated on greater than 50% of the cells in four of 14 tumors as were shared tumor/leukocyte markers using monoclonal antibodies Thy-1, PI153/3, UJ308. The most frequent MED immunophenotype analysis was UJ 13/A+, UJ 127.11+, UJ 167.11+, UJ223.8+, PI 153/3+, A2B5+, GFAP+, NF-H+, and CLA-, NF-M-, NF-L-, 215-, 275-, 282.1-. The authors conclude that MED and SPNET are heterogeneous for expression of 16 markers and have similar immunophenotype analysis profiles, supporting the concept of their common, neuroectodermal origin. Common leukocyte antigen on both tumor cells and leukocytes precludes identification of tumor infiltrating leukocytes using monostaining techniques.
The aim of this study was to evaluate how fish locomote at different muscle temperatures. Sarcomere length excursion and muscle shortening velocity, V, were determined from high-speed motion pictures of carp, Cyprinus carpio (11-14 cm), swimming steadily at various sustained speeds at 10, 15 and 20 degrees C. In the middle and posterior regions of the carp, sarcomeres of the lateral red muscle underwent cyclical excursions of 0.31 microns, centered around the resting length of 2.06 microns (i.e. from 1.91 to 2.22 microns). The amplitudes of the sarcomere length excursions were essentially independent of swimming speed and temperature. As tail-beat frequency increased linearly with swimming speed regardless of temperature, the sarcomeres underwent the same length changes in a shorter time. Thus, V increased in a linear and temperature-independent manner with swimming speed. Neither temperature nor swimming speed had an influence on tail-beat amplitude or tail height. Our findings indicate that muscle fibres are used only over a narrow, temperature-independent range of V/Vmax (0.17-0.36) where power and efficiency are maximal. Carp start to recruit their white muscles at swimming speeds where the red muscle V/Vmax becomes too high (and thus power output declines). When the V/Vmax of the active muscle falls too low during steady swimming, carp switch to 'burst-and-coast' swimming, apparently to keep V/Vmax high. Because Vmax (maximum velocity of shortening) of carp red muscle has a Q10 of 1.63, the transition speeds between swimming styles are lower at lower temperatures. Thus, carp recruit their white anaerobic muscle at a lower swimming speed at lower temperatures (verified by electromyography), resulting in a lower maximum sustainable swimming speed. The present findings also indicate that, to generate the same total force and power to swim at a given speed, carp at 10 degrees C must recruit about 50% greater fibre cross-sectional area than they do at 20 degrees C.
NA
It has been shown that trophoblastic beta 1-glycoprotein (TBG) and placental alpha 2-microglobulin (PAMG-2) in concentrations 60-120 micrograms/ml suppresses both the inductive and proliferative phase of unidirectional mixed lymphocyte reaction in mice, as well as proliferative responses to phytohemagglutinin or pokeweed mitogen. TBG protein was more effective. The proteins were not toxic for lymphocytes.
Heart failure is a prevalent condition that is associated with high morbidity and mortality and that places a substantial demand on healthcare resources. As the condition often affects older individuals with comorbidities, its treatment requires the implementation of an integrated model of care that can be applied in primary care, in hospitals, and in the patient's home. The use of heart failure units has improved quality of life in these patients and has reduced hospital admissions. However, in Spain integrated care has not yet been widely implemented. Clinical and preclinical research on heart failure is complex and, consequently, it is essential for investigators to work together in research networks. As a result, 16 Spanish centers have organized themselves into a heart failure research network (REDINSCOR). This network is considering the establishment of a national heart failure registry and is involved in seven research projects, whose subjects range from molecular biology and cell physiology to diagnosis, treatment, and the development of integrated healthcare models.
Life expectancy is increasing in most developed countries, in part due to improved socioeconomic conditions and in part to advances in healthcare. It is widely acknowledged that the promotion of healthy ageing by delaying, minimizing or preventing disabilities or diseases is one of the most important public health objectives in this century. In contrast to the menopausal transition in females, we know relatively little about the contribution of androgens and anabolic hormones to the quality of ageing in men. The European Male Ageing Study (EMAS) is a multicentre prospective cohort designed to examine the prevalence, incidence and geographical distribution of gender-specific and general symptoms of ageing in men, including their endocrine, genetic and psychosocial predictors. Men aged 40-79 years were recruited from eight European centres: Florence (Italy), Leuven (Belgium), Lodz (Poland), Malmö (Sweden), Manchester (UK), Santiago de Compostela (Spain), Szeged (Hungary) and Tartu (Estonia). Subjects were recruited from population registers and those who agreed to take part completed a detailed questionnaire including aspects of personal and medical history, lifestyle factors and sexual function. Objective measures of body size, cognition, vision, skeletal health and neuromuscular function were obtained. Blood and DNA specimens were collected for a range of biochemical and genetic analyses. After an average of 4 years, it is planned to resurvey the participants with similar assessments. A total of 3369 men with a mean age of 60 +/- 11 years were recruited. The mean centre response rate was 43%, and highest in those aged 50-59 years. Those who participated were marginally younger than those who were invited but declined to participate (60.0 vs. 61.1 years). Participants left education slightly later than a sample of non-participants, though there were no consistent differences in levels of general health, physical activity, or smoking. EMAS will provide new population-based data concerning the main features that characterize ageing in men and its critical determinants, particularly with reference to age-related changes in hormone levels. Such information is an important prerequisite to develop effective strategies to reduce age-related disabilities and optimise health and well-being into old-age.
OBJECTIVE: To examine genetic association between rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and known polymorphisms in core genes of the nuclear factor (NF)kappaB pathway, the major intracellular pathway in RA pathogenesis.
METHODS: Discovery and replication sample sets of Spanish patients with RA and controls were studied. A total of 181 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) uniformly spaced along the genomic sequences of 17 core genes of the NFkappaB pathway (REL, RELA, RELB, NFKB1, NFKB2, NFKBIA, NFKBIB, NFKBIE, IKBKA, IKBKB, IKBKE, IKBKAP, KBRAS1, KBRAS2, MAP3K1, MAP3K14, TAX1BP1) were studied by mass spectrometry analysis complemented with 5'-nuclease fluorescence assays in the discovery set, 458 patients with RA and 657 controls. SNPs showing nominal significant differences were further investigated in the replication set of 1189 patients with RA and 1092 controls.
RESULTS: No clear reproducible association was found, although 12 SNPs in IKBKB, IKBKE and REL genes showed significant association in the discovery set. Interestingly, two of the SNPs in the IKBKE gene, weakly associated in the discovery phase, showed a trend to significant association in the replication phase. Pooling both sample sets together, the association with these two SNPs was significant.
CONCLUSION: We did not find any major effect among the explored members of the NFkappaB pathway in RA susceptibility. However, it is possible that variation in the IKBKE gene could have a small effect that requires replication in additional studies.
NA
The ancestral susceptibility hypothesis has been proposed to explain the existence of susceptibility alleles to common diseases. Some ancestral alleles, reflecting ancient adaptations, may be poorly adapted to the more contemporary environmental conditions giving rise to an increased risk to suffer some common disorders. In order to test this hypothesis in schizophrenia, we focused on the monoamine oxidase B gene (MAOB). This gene is involved in deamination of several monoamines, including both xenobiotic amines present in several foods, as well as neurotransmitters such as dopamine. In addition, preliminary analysis based on phase I HapMap data suggested that recent natural selection has acted on this locus. We further explored the existence of this recent positive selection using a test based on extension of linkage disequilibrium (LD) to large distance at the specific selected haplotype taking data from HapMap phase II, and searched for association of the ancestral haplotypes with schizophrenia in a sample of 532 schizophrenic patients and 597 controls from Spain. Our analysis suggested the existence of a haplotype of MAOB subject to recent selection. In agreement with the ancestral susceptibility hypothesis, the ancestral haplotypes were significantly over-represented in patients (P = 0.047). These haplotypes conferred an increased risk to schizophrenia, restricted to males (P = 0.024, OR = 1.41, 95% CI 1.01-1.90). Thus, pending on replication studies, MAOB seems to fit the ancestral susceptibility model, validating a new strategy to search for common schizophrenia susceptibility genes by focusing in those functional candidate genes subject to recent positive selection.
The experience of a patient in a survival study may be modelled as a process with two states and one possible transition from an "alive" state to a "dead" state. In some studies, however, the "alive" state may be partitioned into two or more intermediate (transient) states, each of which corresponding to a particular stage of the illness. In such studies, multi-state models can be used to model the movement of patients among the various states. In these models issues, of interest include the estimation of progression rates, assessing the effects of individual risk factors, survival rates or prognostic forecasting. In this article, we review modelling approaches for multi-state models, and we focus on the estimation of quantities such as the transition probabilities and survival probabilities. Differences between these approaches are discussed, focussing on possible advantages and disadvantages for each method. We also review the existing software currently available to fit the various models and present new software developed in the form of an R library to analyse such models. Different approaches and software are illustrated using data from the Stanford heart transplant study and data from a study on breast cancer conducted in Galicia, Spain.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of the EPISERVE study was to investigate the clinical characteristics of heart failure in outpatients and its diagnostic and therapeutic management by cardiology, internal medicine and primary care specialists.
METHODS: The study involved 507 physicians working in primary care (n=181, 36%), cardiology (n=172, 34%) or internal medicine (n=154, 30%) who treated 2249 consecutive outpatients with heart failure between June and November 2005.
RESULTS: The prevalence of heart failure was 2% in primary care, 17% in cardiology and 12% in internal medicine. Hypertension or coronary disease was the cause in more than 80% of cases. The prevalence of comorbidities was high: atrial fibrillation, 46%; diabetes, 38%; obesity, 64%; dyslipidemia, 60%; anemia, 27%; and renal failure, 7%. In 40% of cases, systolic function was preserved (i.e., left ventricular ejection fraction > or =45%). Echocardiographic and coronary angiographic studies were performed more frequently in patients seen in cardiology and in male patients. There were significant differences between men and women in pharmacologic treatment involving beta-blockers (55% vs. 44%, respectively; P< .001), diuretics (88% vs. 92%, respectively; P< .01) and statins (57% vs. 47%, respectively; P< .001). Only 20% of patients received the treatment recommended by clinical practice guidelines. The factors independently associated with appropriate treatment were being treated in cardiology, hypercholesterolemia, age and etiology.
CONCLUSIONS: The varied approaches of different specialists, the smaller effort put into diagnosis and therapy in women, and the low percentage of patients treated according to guidelines make it essential that an educational and multidisciplinary strategy should be developed for managing outpatients with heart failure.
OBJECTIVE: Characterization of current morbidity and mortality among heart failure (HF) outpatients in Galicia (N.W. Spain), together with their main determinants.
DESIGN: Prospective multicentre study involving 149 primary care physicians.
SETTING: Primary care physicians selected randomly from among all (1959) primary care physicians in Galicia.
PATIENTS: Clinical and epidemiological information for 1195 outpatients with HF were collected in 2006, with a mean follow-up of 6.5+/-1.5 months.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Survival rates were calculated by Cox's proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 76 years, 48% were male, 82% had a history of arterial hypertension, and 32% ischaemic cardiopathy. Echocardiography had been performed in 67%, showing preserved systolic function in 61%. Ninety-two (8%) died during follow-up [74 (80%) of them from cardiac causes], and 313 (29%) were re-admitted to hospital [230 (73%) of them for cardiac reasons]. Multivariate analysis identified the following independent predictors of cardiovascular death and/or readmission: ischaemic cardiopathy [hazard ratio (HR) 1.76, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.29-4.40], stroke (HR 1.79, CI 1.18-2.73), oedema (HR 1.49, CI 1.10-2.03), anaemia (HR 1.66, CI 1.21-2.27), deteriorated systolic function (HR 1.62, CI 1.19-2.20), and previous cardiovascular admissions (HR 2.33, CI 1.67-3.24). Residence in the Barbanza district was identified as an independent predictor of survival free from cardiovascular admission (HR 0.56, CI 0.37-0.86).
CONCLUSION: Morbidity and mortality are currently high among Galician HF patients, and their best single predictor is previous hospitalization for cardiovascular reasons.
Apoptosis is a major feature in alcoholic hepatitis. During apoptosis, the M30 neoepitope becomes exposed after keratin-18 cleavage. The tissue polypeptide-specific antigen (TPS) is a keratin-18 fragment that is routinely used as a tumor marker. Serum TPS levels are increased in patients with alcoholic hepatitis. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible relationship of TPS levels with hepatocyte apoptosis in alcoholic hepatitis. Thirty-one patients with alcoholic hepatitis and 22 with fatty liver were included. Hepatocyte apoptosis was evaluated by M30 immunostaining. Serum TPS levels were measured by a commercial immunoassay. The apoptotic score was higher in patients with alcoholic hepatitis than in patients with fatty liver. There was a significant correlation between the apoptotic score and TPS levels. The correlation of the apoptotic score with TPS levels was stronger than with standard liver tests. Serum TPS may be a marker of apoptosis in alcoholic hepatitis.
OBJECTIVES: To replicate a previously reported association with osteoarthritis (OA) of the promoter single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10980705 in the endothelial differentiation gene 2 (EDG2).
METHODS: Five collections of samples, four from Europe and one from China, were studied. They included patients with 3 OA phenotypes: 1501 with knee OA, 1497 with hip OA and 376 with generalised OA. A total of 2521 controls were also studied. Allele and genotype frequencies of the rs10980705 SNP were analysed in each individual sample collection and in pooled data. In addition, a meta-analysis to incorporate results from the original Japanese report was performed.
RESULTS: The association of the rs10980705 SNP with knee OA was not replicated in any of the five sample collections studied or in their combined analysis (odds ratio (OR) 1.10, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.22; p = 0.10). Meta-analysis of all data, including the original Japanese study, did show association with knee OA (OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.26; p = 0.002) but the effect was accounted for by the Japanese data and was less significant than the original report. No association was found with hip OA or with generalised OA.
CONCLUSIONS: The original report of a promising genetic association between a druggable G-protein coupled receptor, EDG2, and knee OA has not been replicated. This lack of replication could be due to a modest effect of the promoter polymorphism that will require even larger studies (the winners curse) although a more pronounced effect in the Asian population vs Europeans cannot be excluded.
It is well established that reproductive function is gated by the state of energy reserves of the organism; conditions of metabolic stress and energy insufficiency being frequently coupled to disturbed reproductive maturation and/or infertility. In addition, obesity is also commonly linked to altered puberty onset and reproductive impairment. Such an impact of energy status on the reproductive axis is conveyed through a number of neuropeptide hormones and metabolic cues, whose nature and mechanisms of action have begun to be deciphered only in recent years. In this context, the emergence of kisspeptins, encoded by the KiSS-1 gene, and their receptor, GPR54, as indispensable signals for normal pubertal maturation and gonadal function, has raised the possibility that the KiSS-1/GRP54 system might also participate in coupling body energy status and reproduction. We revise herein the experimental evidence, gathered in rodent models, supporting the contention that the hypothalamic KiSS-1 system operates as a central conduit for conveying metabolic information onto the centers governing reproductive function, through a putative leptin-kisspeptin-GnRH pathway. Admittedly, key aspects of this 'metabolic' network involving the KiSS-1 system, such as its different peripheral regulators and central effectors, have not been fully elucidated. Nonetheless, the proposed hypothalamic circuitry, responsible for transmitting metabolic information onto the reproductive axis through KiSS-1 neurons, might explain, at least in part, the mechanisms for the well-known alterations of fertility linked to conditions of disturbed energy balance in humans, from anorexia nervosa to morbid obesity.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether among middle-aged and elderly men there is evidence of international differences in the prevalence of chronic widespread pain (CWP) and whether any such differences could be explained by psychological, psychosocial factors or differences in physical health status.
METHODS: The European Male Ageing Study (EMAS) sampled from population registers in cities (centres) of eight European countries. Each centre recruited an age-stratified sample of men aged 40-79 years. Information on pain was collected by questionnaire and subjects were classified according to whether they satisfied the American College of Rheumatology definition of CWP. Information was collected on social status, mental health, recent life events and co-morbidities.
RESULTS: Across all centres 3963 subjects completed a study questionnaire, with participation rates ranging from 24% in Hungary to 72% in Estonia. There were significant differences in prevalence: between 5% and 7% in centres in Italy, England, Belgium and Sweden, 9-15% in centres in Spain, Poland and Hungary and 15% in Estonia. There were strong relationships between poor mental health, adverse recent life events, co-morbidities and CWP. Adjustment for these factors explained between half and all of the excess risk in the eastern European centres: the excess risk in Poland was explained (odds ratio (OR) 1.1, 95% CI 0.9 to 1.2) but there remained excess risk in Hungary (OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.4 to 1.8) and Estonia (OR 2.6, 95% CI 2.2 to 2.9).
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first directly to compare the occurrence of CWP internationally. There is an excess prevalence in countries of eastern Europe and this excess is associated with adverse psychosocial factors as well as poorer psychological and physical health.
Arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia are two of the main risk factors for cardiovascular and renal disease in Spain. Lifestyle modification and drug therapy are the mainstays of risk reduction. Both the goals of therapy and the choice of drug treatment, in particular of antihypertensive treatment, are determined by the patient's demographic characteristics, the presence of other cardiovascular risk factors and the coexistence of asymptomatic vascular and kidney disease; that is, by the determinants of overall cardiovascular risk. Although some clinical guidelines exclude beta-blockers from first-line treatment of hypertension because they may have little effect, we believe that the five main classes of antihypertensive drugs currently available could provide first-line therapy since the majority of the hypertensive patients require combination therapy to achieve their blood pressure targets. Statins are fundamental to the pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia. Their primary effect is to reduce the plasma low-density lipoprotein level, which has been shown to be closely related to the reduction in cardiovascular risk. Other therapeutic agents include selective cholesterol absorption inhibitors (e.g., ezetimibe), which must be used in combination with statins, and fibrates, whose use is more restricted but which are helpful in patients with hypertriglyceridemia.
Arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia are two of the main risk factors for cardiovascular and renal disease in Spain. Lifestyle modification and drug therapy are the mainstays of risk reduction. Both the goals of therapy and the choice of drug treatment, in particular of antihypertensive treatment, are determined by the patient's demographic characteristics, the presence of other cardiovascular risk factors and the coexistence of asymptomatic vascular and kidney disease; that is, by the determinants of overall cardiovascular risk. Although some clinical guidelines exclude beta-blockers from first-line treatment of hypertension because they may have little effect, we believe that the five main classes of antihypertensive drugs currently available could provide first-line therapy since the majority of the hypertensive patients require combination therapy to achieve their blood pressure targets. Statins are fundamental to the pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia. Their primary effect is to reduce the plasma low-density lipoprotein level, which has been shown to be closely related to the reduction in cardiovascular risk. Other therapeutic agents include selective cholesterol absorption inhibitors (e.g., ezetimibe), which must be used in combination with statins, and fibrates, whose use is more restricted but which are helpful in patients with hypertriglyceridemia.
Williams Syndrome (WS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a submicroscopic deletion on chromosome 7 q11.23. This is a systemic disorder in which cardiac problems and mental retardation are the key phenotypic symptoms. Although displaying a general cognitive impairment, they are most often described as exhibiting a peak and valley profile, with relative sparing of language and face processing abilities and severe impairment of visual-spatial cognition. In this study, we conducted a detailed cognitive assessment using Wechsler Intelligence Scales on a WS and a normal development control group. To explore the hypothesis of a dissociative cognitive architecture in WS, performance on subtests, factorial indexes and composite measures of Verbal, Performance and Full Scale Intelligence Quotient were analysed. Individuals with WS were found to score in Full Scale Intelligence Quotient (FSIQ) within mild to moderate mental retardation interval, and had significantly lower scores in all measures when they were compared with the normal development group. However, a specific intragroup cognitive profile was found for Williams Syndrome (confirming Mervis' definition of the WS cognitive profile) along with a specific developmental pathway (absence of an age-associated cognitive decline).
OBJECTIVE: Mutations in SLC16A2, the gene encoding the thyroid hormone (TH)-specific transporter monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), result in a thyroid phenotype and severe mental retardation caused by neuronal TH deficiency. These mutational effects raise the question of whether polymorphic variation in SLC16A2 may also be associated with differences in serum levels of TH and/or TSH.
DESIGN: This is the first major study of the frequency of the SLC16A2 rs6647476 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (amino acid change Ser107Pro). We also studied the relationships of SLC16A2 genetic variants with serum levels of TSH, T4 and T3, with their mRNA expression and with expression of the TH-responsive genes ZAKI-4 and BTEB in white blood cells. Experiments in cultured fibroblasts were carried out to ascertain the dynamics of the T3 response.
METHODS: A total of 276 men were studied. Genotyping of the S107P SNP was carried out using polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP); serum hormone levels were determined by chemiluminescence; expression of mRNA was quantified by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The SLC16A2 S107P SNP was found in 36% of Galician males. With the present sample size we did not find any association of this polymorphism with variability in serum levels of TSH, free T4 (fT4) or fT3, or with basal expression of mRNA for SLC16A2 or the two TH-responsive genes ZAKI-4 and BTEB, either in white blood cells or in cultured human fibroblasts from either Ser107 or Pro107 genotypes under T3 stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The S107P change in MCT8 is frequent in the male population in Galicia. In the population studied in this report an association with a thyroid phenotype was not demonstrated, even though the S107P SNP causes an important amino acid change.
BACKGROUND: Folliculo-sebaceous cystic hamartoma (FSCH) is an uncommon skin condition presenting as a slow-growing papulo-nodular lesion, in or around the nose. Most cases are not clinically suspected and only histopathological examination allows the diagnosis. Pathological features include a dermal-located infundibulo-cystic structure with sebaceous glands radiating around, a stromal component encircling the epithelial structures, with clefts between the lesional epithelial and stromal parts, as well as between this and the adjacent dermis.
RESULTS: We report eight patients with the diagnosis of FSCH (5 females and 3 males), with ages ranging from 35 to 77 years. Most cases (5 out of 8) were located in or around the nose and sizes were comprised between 0.6 and 1.2 cm. Lesions had grown for long periods of time, up to ten years in one case. Immunohistochemistry showed staining for p63 in the epithelial component of all lesions, while CD10 was only present in some sebocytes. CD34 and Factor XIIIa positive cells were present in the lesional stroma. Staining for androgen and alpha-estrogen receptors was also usually noticed.
CONCLUSIONS: FCSH is a hamartomatous skin lesion, clinically indistinct but with well-defined histopathological features. Immunohistochemistry shows a profile very close to normal sebaceous glands.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of changing from etanercept or methotrexate monotherapy to etanercept plus methotrexate combination therapy on radiographic progression in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients.
METHODS: Patients enrolled in this 1-year open-label study previously completed a 3-year blinded study in which they received methotrexate or etanercept monotherapy or the combination of both. All patients received the combination of etanercept 25 mg subcutaneously twice weekly plus oral methotrexate up to 20 mg/week. The primary radiographic endpoint was a change in modified total Sharp score (TSS), as assessed by blinded readers.
RESULTS: At baseline, patients previously receiving methotrexate monotherapy (etanercept-added, n = 52) or etanercept monotherapy (methotrexate-added, n = 68) had moderate disease activity levels (mean disease activity score (DAS) of 2.6 and 2.5, respectively), whereas patients previously receiving combination therapy (n = 90) had a low disease activity level (mean DAS of 2.0). The addition of etanercept to methotrexate monotherapy resulted in a significant reduction in radiographic progression (p<0.05). Mean TSS changes in the previous year versus the current year were +1.79 versus +0.25 for the etanercept-added group (p<0.05); +0.51 versus -0.18 for the methotrexate-added group (NS) and +0.42 versus +0.24 for the combination group (NS).
CONCLUSION: In these RA patients with on average moderate disease activity despite previous methotrexate monotherapy, combination treatment with etanercept and methotrexate inhibited radiographic progression and improved radiographic outcomes. These data, in conjunction with the previously published clinical data, support the use of combination therapy in RA patients with moderate disease activity.
Genes involved in sex hormone pathways are candidates for influencing bone strength. Polymorphisms in these genes were tested for association with heel quantitative ultrasound (QUS) parameters in middle-aged and elderly European men. Men 40-79 yr of age were recruited from population registers in eight European centers for the European Male Aging Study (EMAS). Polymorphisms were genotyped in AR, ESR1, ESR2, CYP19A1, CYP17A1, SHBG, SRD5A2, LHB, and LHCGR. QUS parameters broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA) and speed of sound (SOS) were measured in the heel and used to derive BMD. The relationships between QUS parameters and polymorphisms were assessed using linear regression adjusting for age and center. A total of 2693 men, with a mean age of 60.1 +/- 11.1 (SD) yr were included in the analysis. Their mean BUA was 80.0 +/- 18.9 dB/Mhz, SOS was 1550.2 +/- 34.1 m/s, and BMD was 0.542 +/- 0.141 g/cm(2). Significant associations were observed between multiple SNPs in a linkage disequilibrium (LD) block within CYP19A1, peaking at the TCT indel with the deletion allele associating with reduced ultrasound BMD in heterozygotes (beta =-0.016, p = -0.005) and homozygotes (beta = -0.029, p = 0.001). The results for BUA and SOS were similar. Significant associations with QUS parameters were also observed for the CAG repeat in AR and SNPs in CYP17A1, LHCGR, and ESR1. Our data confirm evidence of association between bone QUS parameters and polymorphisms in CYP19A1, as well as modest associations with polymorphisms in CYP17A1, ESR1, LHCGR, and AR in a population sample of European men; this supports a role for genetically determined sex hormone actions in influencing male bone health.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect in OA (Osteoarthritis) susceptibility of putative damaging changes in ADAM (A Disintegrin And Metalloprotease) and ADAMTS (ADAM with ThromboSpondin motif) proteases.
METHODS: Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNP) in 18 ADAMTS and 31 ADAM genes were analyzed with two software applications for prediction of functional damage. Four putative damaging nsSNP were found in ADAMTS2, ADAMTS14, ADAMTS16 and ADAM12, respectively. These nsSNPs were analyzed in case-control sample collections with a variety of phenotypes totalling 3217 OA patients and 2214 healthy controls, all of them Caucasians.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found in ADAMTS2, ADAMTS16 and ADAM12 nsSNPs. Conversely, the rare allele of the rs4747096 nsSNP in ADAMTS14 was overrepresented in women requiring joint replacement because of knee OA (O.R.(M-H) (odds ratio. Mantel-Haenszel)=1.41, 95% C.I.=1.1-1.8; P=0.002) and in patients with symptomatic hand OA (O.R.=1.37, 95% C.I.=1.0-1.9; P=0.047). A non significant increase in the frequency of the same allele was also found in patients with hip OA requiring prosthesis (O.R.(M-H)=1.14, 95% C.I.=1.0-1.3; P=0.08). No association was found with other OA phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: Our findings implicate ADAMTS14 in OA, specifically in knee OA requiring joint replacement in women and, possibly, in hand OA. Independent association of ADAMTS14 genetic variation to knee OA in women has been communicated. ADAMTS14 involvement, if confirmed, will open a new area of interest in OA pathogenesis because of its role in the maturation of collagen fibers.
We assessed the presence of degenerating neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and ventral tegmental area (VTA) of parkinsonian monkeys. For this purpose, we used two histological markers of cellular death, Fluoro Jade B (FJB) staining and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL). Eight monkeys were subacutelly treated with four to six 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) injections (1-1.5 mg/kg, cumulative dose) and sacrificed 1 week and 11 months after last MPTP injection. Eight additional monkeys were chronically exposed to MPTP (4.5-15.3 mg/kg, cumulative dose) and sacrificed 6-35 months after last MPTP dose. Three intact monkeys served as controls. The number of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)- and TUNEL-positive cells was quantified in SNpc and VTA and colocalization of FJB-positive and TUNEL-positive cells with neuronal (TH, NeuN, MAP2) and glial markers (human ferritin, GFAP) assessed on doubly labelled tissue sections. Only MPTP monkeys with 1-week survival displayed few doubly FJB-TH-labelled cells. Both groups of subacute MPTP monkeys, but not chronic MPTP monkeys, showed a significant increased number of TUNEL-positive cells in SNpc. TUNEL-positive cells exhibited morphological features and histological markers indicative of glial cells, whereas TUNEL/NeuN or TUNEL/MAP-2 colocalization was not observed. Our results indicate that MPTP treatment produced a nonapoptotic cell death of dopaminergic cells and the activation of the apoptotic cascade in glial cells. More importantly, we failed to demonstrate the existence of a delayed neurodegenerative process in the dopaminergic neurons after concluding MPTP injection thus, casting doubt on the validity of the "progressive model" created by repeated MPTP administration to monkeys.
Given its relative ease, screening the entire mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) for heteroplasmic or novel homoplasmic mutations has become part of the routine diagnostic workup for the molecular geneticist confronted with a disease case exhibiting clinical and biochemical features of mitochondrial dysfunction. "Novelty" of a given mtDNA variant is most often equated with nonregistration in the extensive MITOMAP database (www.mitomap.org). This practice has led to a number of spurious findings and wrong conclusions concerning the pathogenic status of specific mtDNA mutations, especially in the absence of proper evaluation and pathogenicity scoring. We demonstrate by way of real cases targeting the mt-tRNA(Cys) (MT-TC) gene and a stretch within the MT-ND3 gene, that a straightforward Google search can identify twice as many previously observed mutations than any MITOMAP query could achieve. Further, we reassess the recent rediscovery of m.15287T>C by listing all known occurrences and, where possible, providing the haplogroup context, shedding new light on the potential pathogenicity status of m.15287T>C.
BACKGROUND: Type 2 familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD2) is characterised by loss of fat in the limbs and buttocks and results from mutations in the LMNA gene.
AIM: To evaluate the role of several genes involved in adipogenesis in order to better understand the underlying mechanisms of regional loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue (scAT) in patients with FPLD2.
METHODS: In total, 7 patients with FPLD2 and 10 healthy control participants were studied. A minimal model was used to calculate the insulin sensitivity (IS). scAT was obtained from abdomen and thigh by biopsy. Relative gene expression was quantified by real-time reverse transcription PCR in a thermal cycler. Prelamin A western blot analysis was carried out on scAT and prelamin A nuclear localisation was determined using immunofluorescence. Adipocyte nuclei were examined by electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Patients with FPLD2 were found to have significantly lower IS. The expression of LMNA was similar in both groups. The expression of PPARG2, RB1, CCND3 and LPL in thigh but not in abdomen scAT was significantly reduced (67%, 25%, 38% and 66% respectively) in patients with FPLD2. Significantly higher levels of prelamin A were found in peripheral scAT of patients with FPLD2. Defects in the peripheral heterochromatin and a nuclear fibrous dense lamina were present in the adipocytes of patients with FPLD2.
CONCLUSIONS: In FPLD2 participants, prelamin A accumulation in peripheral scAT is associated with a reduced expression of several genes involved in adipogenesis, which could perturb the balance between proliferation and differentiation in adipocytes, leading to less efficient tissue regeneration.
OBJECTIVE: Subjects with symptomatic peripheral artery disease (PAD) have an elevated prevalence of carotid stenosis and of silent myocardial ischaemia. As such, clinical guidelines advocate the detection of sub-clinical vascular disease in this population. However, the prevalence of occult vascular disease in asymptomatic patients with a low ankle-brachial index (ABI) has not been previously evaluated.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study in five primary care centres for patients' selection and two University Hospitals for further assessment. Subjects were 1070 asymptomatic individuals between 60 and 80 years of age with at least two cardiovascular risk factors, selected for ankle-brachial index measurement. Eighty five subjects with an ABI <0.9 and an equal number of controls, matched for age, gender, diabetes, and smoking habit, and with a normal ABI, were referred to the Hospital for carotid ultrasound and exercise stress tests (EST). Main outcome measures were prevalence of a carotid stenosis >50% and an abnormal EST.
RESULTS: The prevalence of a low ABI in the overall population was 9.1%. A carotid stenosis >50% was detected in 14.3% of the subjects with a low ABI and in 4.7% of the control subjects (Odds Ratio [OR]: 3.37; 95% Confidence Interval [CI]: 1.04-10.93, P = .033). The prevalence of a positive EST test was 16.2% in those with a low ABI and 10.5% in control subjects (OR: 1.65; 95% CI: 0.63-4.29, P = .309). These prevalences were higher in older subjects, in those with hypertension or diabetes, or in those with dyslipidemia.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that in high-risk asymptomatic subjects >60 years of age, the presence of an ABI <0.9 identifies a subgroup of the population with an increased prevalence of carotid stenosis and of silent myocardial ischemia and, as such, are candidates for closer follow-up.
CONTEXT: The individual variability in the waning androgenic-anabolic functions of aging men may be influenced by the CAG repeat polymorphism in exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR), affecting androgen sensitivity. However, findings on its phenotypic effects are inconclusive.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate the relationships between health status, various reproductive hormones, and the AR CAG repeat length.
DESIGN: We conducted a multinational prospective cohort observational study with cross-sectional baseline data.
SETTING: This was a population survey of community-dwelling men.
PARTICIPANTS: Men (40-79 yr old; n = 3369) were randomly recruited from centers in eight European countries; CAG repeat analysis was performed in 2878 men.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We measured the correlations of the CAG repeat length with selected endocrine, metabolic, and phenotypic parameters related to aging and sex hormone action.
RESULTS: Only minor differences were found in CAG repeat lengths between the eight European countries. They showed significant positive association with total, free, and bioavailable levels of testosterone (T) and estradiol. FSH but not LH correlated inversely with CAG repeat length. Significant associations were found with bone ultrasound parameters at the calcaneus. Negative correlation was found with triglycerides, but not with other blood lipids or with anthropometry, blood pressure, hemoglobin, insulin sensitivity, or sexual and prostatic functions.
CONCLUSIONS: The AR CAG repeat length correlates significantly with serum T and estradiol of aging men. Weaker transcriptional activity of the AR with longer CAG-encoded polyglutamine repeats appears to be totally or nearly totally compensated for by higher T levels. The residual phenotypic correlations may reflect differences in estrogen levels/actions after aromatization of the higher T levels.
Using long-term streptozotocin (STZ)-treated male rats, we recently proposed that defective function of hypothalamic KiSS-1 system is mechanistically relevant for central hypogonadotropism of uncontrolled diabetes. However, the temporal pattern of such defects and its potential contribution to disturbed gonadotropin secretion in the diabetic female remain so far unexplored. To cover these issues, expression analyses and hormonal tests were conducted in diabetic male (1 wk after STZ; short term) and female (4 wk after STZ; long term) rats. Short-term diabetic males had lower basal testosterone levels and decreased gonadotropin responses to orchidectomy (ORX), which associated with significantly attenuated post-ORX rises of hypothalamic KiSS-1 mRNA. Yet kisspeptin administration to diabetic males was able to acutely elicit supramaximal LH and testosterone responses and normalize post-ORX gonadotropin secretion. Long-term diabetic females showed persistent anestrus and significantly decreased basal gonadotropin levels as well as blunted LH responses to ovariectomy; changes that were linked to lowering of basal and postovariectomy expression of hypothalamic KiSS-1 mRNA. Moreover, despite prevailing gonadotropin suppression, LH responses to acute kisspeptin administration were fully preserved, and even enhanced after its repeated injection, in diabetic females. In sum, our present findings further define the temporal course and mechanistic relevance of altered hypothalamic KiSS-1 system in the hypogonadotropic state of uncontrolled diabetes. Furthermore, our data provide the basis for the potential therapeutic intervention of the KiSS-1 system as adjuvant in the management of disturbed gonadotropin secretion of type 1 diabetes in the female.
BACKGROUND: Existing medical therapeutic strategies to achieve and maintain clinically significant weight loss in morbid obesity remain limited and the biliopancreatic diversion (BPD) is still the most effective among the bariatric surgical procedures. Our objective was to evaluate the weight and food intake after this procedure in a rat model.
METHODS: Rats randomly underwent one of the following protocols (1) BPD (n = 12) versus sham (n = 12) with a follow-up period of 30 days and (2) BPD (n = 4) versus pair-fed (PF; n = 4) with a follow-up period of 50 days. Under intraperitoneal anesthesia with ketamine-xilacine, a subcardinal corpo-antral gastrectomy was made, preserving the gastric fundus that was anastomosed to a jejunal limb after dissecting the proximal jejunum 5 cm below the ligament of Treitz to form the alimentary limb. The biliopancreatic limb was terminolaterally anastomosed to the distal ileum 5 cm above the ileocecal valve to form the common limb. Sham animals underwent only abdominal incision. Weight and food intake were measured every day.
RESULTS: In protocol 1, after postoperative day 30, BPD rats exhibited a mean weight reduction of 17.9% while shams increased 12.4%. There was no difference in food intake adjusted per 100 g of body weight. In protocol 2, after postoperative day 50, BPD rats had a mean weight reduction of 22.6% and, despite increasing their caloric intake from a mean of 42.6 after 6 days to 65.8 kcal/day after 50 days, they kept a similar mean weight of 344.0 and 340.2 g, respectively; on the contrary, PF rats exhibited a 30.8% body weight gain.
CONCLUSIONS: After the BPD, body weight is maintained independently of changes in food and energy intake.
OBJECTIVES: A polygenic model has been proposed in order to explain the genetic susceptibility to sporadic breast cancer. According to this model, common population variants would be responsible for low to modest effects on the risk of developing the disease. We have carried out a high-throughput SNP genotyping project in order to shed some light on the complex genetic aetiology of non-familial breast cancer.
METHODS: Ninety-one genes have been selected because of their implications in several candidate cell pathways for breast cancer. A total of 640 SNPs in these genes were genotyped in a series of 450 consecutive cases and 448 controls from mainland Spain. Promising SNPs were then studied in an independent series of 294 cases and 299 controls from the Canary Islands.
RESULTS: In the first case-control series we identified 25 SNPs with P-values below 0.05 (under a 1 df Chi-square test), five of them with P-values below 0.01 (best=0.0008). In the stage 2 Canary Islands series, odd ratios (OR) for two SNPs in HUS1 were in a consistent direction.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs located at the gene HUS1 are good candidates for further investigation in independent association studies and functional assays.
It is not known if aging induces changes in nigral vascularization and nigral vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels similar to those previously reported for Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study nonexercised rats displayed age-dependent decreases in the density of nigral microvessels and VEGF mRNA expression, which were reversed by physical exercise. Such changes may enhance the vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons and the risk of developing PD, and may be reduced by exercise. Furthermore, the observed pattern is the opposite of that previously observed in PD, suggesting that the process underlying PD is not an accelerated age-dependent decline in the dopaminergic system.
The aim of this article was to report the emergence of patient infections with linezolid-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (LRSE) in a tertiary university hospital. Our objectives were to determine the molecular mechanism of the resistance, set up the genetic relationship among isolates, and analyze the relations between linezolid usage, period of treatment, and emergence of resistance in the hospital. The emergence of infection with linezolid-resistant S. epidermidis affecting 20 patients in a tertiary university hospital was investigated using repetitive sequence-based PCR (rep-PCR, DiversiLab System; BioMérieux, Inc., France). The presence of the G2576T mutation of 23S rRNA was screened by pyrosequencing. We determined the pattern of linezolid usage in the hospital as a whole and in the critical care unit that was most affected. G2576T mutation of 23S rRNA was detected in all linezolid-resistant S. epidermidis studied. Of these, 90% were genetically related and had been recovered from patients admitted to the same critical care unit. There had been an increase in linezolid usage in the hospital and in the critical care unit in the 2 years prior to the emergence of resistant strains. More strict control measures in hand washing and linezolid prescription were subsequently established, but no reduction in LRSE rates have yet been observed. Linezolid-resistant S. epidermidis emerged at our hospital, probably from a single strain originating in the critical care unit. The most likely explanation is that person-to-person spread of linezolid-resistant S. epidermidis led to skin colonization and, after linezolid treatment, this resistant staphylococci became the dominant cutaneous flora causing infection in some critical patients. In order to preserve the usefulness of this antibiotic as a therapeutic agent and to avoid a situation similar to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, judicious use of antibiotics is essential.
The number and frequency of susceptibility alleles at loci associated to most psychiatric disorders is largely unknown, in spite of its relevance for the design of studies aiming to find these alleles. Both, common polymorphisms and rare mutations may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to complex psychiatric disorders, being the relative relevance of each type of variation currently under debate. Here, we confirmed the existence of a common protective haplotype against schizophrenia at the dopamine D(3) receptor (DRD3) gene, by replication and pooled analysis with previous data (Mantel-Haenszel chi(2) P value = 0.00227; OR = 0.79, 95% CI 0.68-0.92, based on 794 cases and 1,078 controls from three independent populations of European origin). This protective haplotype is at very low frequency in Sub-Saharan Africans (median 0.06) and at intermediate frequencies in other populations (median 0.25). We also revealed, by examining the patterns of linkage disequilibrium around this gene, that the protective haplotype has reached high frequency in non-African populations due to selection acting, most probably, on a linked functional polymorphism, the non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism Ser9Gly (rs6280), also at DRD3. Thus, this finding shows that the natural selection may play a role in the existence of common alleles conferring different susceptibility to schizophrenia.
In many biomedical applications, interest lies in being able to distinguish between two possible states of a given response variable, depending on the values of certain continuous predictors. If the number of predictors, p, is high, or if there is redundancy among them, it then becomes important to decide on the selection of the best subset of predictors that will be able to obtain the models with greatest discrimination capacity. With this aim in mind, logistic generalized additive models were considered and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were applied in order to determine and compare the discriminatory capacity of such models. This study sought to develop bootstrap-based tests that allow for the following to be ascertained: (a) the optimal number q < or = p of predictors; and (b) the model or models including q predictors, which display the largest AUC (area under the ROC curve). A simulation study was conducted to verify the behaviour of these tests. Finally, the proposed method was applied to a computer-aided diagnostic system dedicated to early detection of breast cancer.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of different forms of atherosclerotic disease on prognosis in diabetic patients.
METHODS: This multicenter prospective cohort study involved 1423 consecutive patients with diabetes mellitus who were recruited by 31 primary care physicians. The patients' characteristics were recorded and they were followed up for 45 +/- 10 months.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients (50% male) was 66 years, 64% had hypertension, 70% had dyslipidemia, and 26% had had a previous cardiovascular event. By the end of follow-up, 81 (6.2%) had died, 40 (3%) of whom due to cardiovascular causes, and 393 (30%) had been hospitalized, 179 (14%) of whom for cardiovascular disease. Multivariate analysis identified the following factors as independent predictors of mortality: age (hazard ratio [HR]=1.08; 95% confidence interval [CI],1.05-1.11), previous cardiovascular disease (HR=2.15; 95% CI, 1.12-4.14) and diuretic treatment (HR=3.40; 95% CI, 1.76-6.56), while the prescription of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin-receptor antagonist had a protective effect (HR=0.48; 95% CI, 0.25-0.93). Compared with diabetics without a previous cardiovascular event, the risk of a cardiovascular event during follow-up was greater in those with a history of either ischemic heart disease (HR=2.48; 95% CI, 1.51-4.07), cerebrovascular disease (HR=2.51; 95% CI, 1.28-4.92), or peripheral vascular disease (HR=1.46; 95% CI, 0.81-2.60).
CONCLUSIONS: The increase in the risk of a cardiovascular event was similar in diabetics with ischemic heart disease and those with cerebrovascular disease. In both cases, the risk was more than double that in patients without a history of cardiovascular disease.
Previous studies have shown that serotonin neurons play an important role in the induction and maintenance of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in animals with lesion of the nigrostriatal dopamine system. Patients with Parkinson's disease that receive transplants of foetal ventral mesencephalic tissue, the graft cell preparation is likely to contain, in addition to dopamine neurons, serotonin neurons that will vary in number depending on the landmarks used for dissection. Here, we have studied the impact of grafted serotonin neurons--alone or mixed with dopamine neurons--on the development of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in rats with a partial 6-hydroxydopamine lesion of the host nigrostriatal projection. In these rats, which showed only low-level dyskinesia at the time of transplantation, serotonin grafts induced a worsening in the severity of dyskinesia that developed during continued L-DOPA treatment, while the dopamine-rich graft had the opposite, dampening effect. The detrimental effect seen in animals with serotonin neuron grafts was dramatically increased when the residual dopamine innervation in the striatum was removed by a second 6-hydroxydopamine lesion. Interestingly, rats with grafts that contained a mixture of dopamine and serotonin neurons (in approximately 2:1) showed a marked reduction in L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia over time, and the appearance of severe dyskinesia induced by the removal of the residual dopamine innervation, seen in the animals with transplants of serotonin neurons alone, was blocked. FosB expression in the striatal projection neurons, which is associated with dyskinesias, was also normalized by the dopamine-rich grafts, but not by the serotonin neuron grafts. These data indicate that as long as a sufficient portion, some 10-20%, of the dopamine innervation still remains, the increased host serotonin innervation generated by the grafted serotonin neurons will have limited effect on the development or severity of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias. At more advanced stages of the disease, when the dopamine innervation of the putamen is reduced below this critical threshold, grafted serotonin neurons are likely to aggravate l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in those cases where the dopamine re-innervation derived from the grafted neurons is insufficient in magnitude or do not cover the critical dyskinesia-inducing sub-regions of the grafted putamen. We conclude that it is not the absolute number of serotonin neurons in the grafts, but the relative densities of dopamine and serotonin innervations in the grafted striatum that is the critical factor in determining the long-term effect of foetal tissue graft, beneficial or detrimental, on dyskinesia in grafted Parkinson's disease patients.
The study assessed the differences in electromyographic (EMG) activity recorded during clenching in women with chronic unilateral temporomandibular disorders (TMDs) as compared to control subjects. Seventy-five full dentate, normo-occlusion, right-handed, similarly aged female subjects were recruited. Twenty five subjects presented with right side TMD, 25 presented with left side TMD and 25 pain-free control subjects participated. Using integrated surface EMG over a 1 s contraction, the anterior temporalis and masseter muscles were evaluated bilaterally while subjects performed maximum voluntary clenching. Lower EMG activation was observed in patients with TMD as compared to control subjects (temporalis: 195.74+/-18.57 vs. 275.74+/-22.11, P=0.011; masseters: 151.09+/-17.37 vs. 283.29+/-31.87, P<0.001). An asymmetry index (SAI) was calculated to determine ratios of right to left sided activation. Patients with right-sided TMD demonstrated preferential use of their left-sided muscles (SAI -5.35+/-4.02) whereas patients with left-sided TMD demonstrated preferential use of their right-sided muscles (SAI 6.95+/-2.82), (P=0.016). This unilateral reduction in temporalis and masseter activity could be considered as a specific protective functional adaptation of the neuromuscular system due to nociceptive input. The asymmetry index (SAI) may be a useful measure in discriminating patients with right vs. left-sided TMD.
The origin of the Etruscans (the present day Tuscany, Italy), one of the most enigmatic non-Indo-European civilizations, is under intense controversy. We found novel genetic evidences on the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) establishing a genetic link between Anatolia and the ancient Etruria. By way of complete mtDNA genome sequencing of a novel autochthonous Tuscan branch of haplogroup U7 (namely U7a2a), we have estimated an historical time frame for the arrival of Anatolian lineages to Tuscany ranging from 1.1+/-0.1 to 2.3+/-0.4 kya B.P.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency is the commonest inborn error in steroid hormone biosynthesis. Functional in vitro assessment of mutant activity generally correlates well with clinical phenotype and therefore has contributed greatly to phenotype prediction in this CAH variant. Three CYP21A2 sequence variants (g.1641C>T, p.A265V; g.1752G>C, p.W302S; and g.2012A>G, p.D322G) identified in patients with non-classic and simple virilizing CAH were characterized using a yeast co-expression system and a computational three-dimensional CYP21A2 model. Computational analysis of the mutants in the three-dimensional structural model predicted no relevant effect of p.A265V, while p.W302S and p.D322G were predicted to impact significantly on enzyme function. Consistent with these findings, in vitro mutant analysis revealed enzyme activity similar to wild-type for p.A265V, whereas p.W302S and p.D322G exerted activities compatible with simple virilizing and non-classical CAH, respectively. The results indicate that p.A265V is an allelic variant rather than a disease-causing amino acid change, whilst p.W302S and p.D322G could be confirmed as functionally relevant mutations. These findings emphasize the value of in vitro functional analysis of sequence variations in predicting genotype-phenotype correlations and disease severity.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine whether measurement of the QRS axis can help to predict outcome in patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization therapy.
METHODS: The study included 78 patients who had undergone successful cardiac resynchronization device implantation. Patients were classified as having either a normal QRS axis (i.e., between -30 degrees and +120 degrees) or a left QRS axis deviation (i.e., between -30 degrees and -90 degrees). Patients were regarded as responders if they fulfilled all of the following criteria: their functional class improved by at least one grade, their left ventricular ejection fraction increased by at least 5%, they did not need hospitalization for worsening heart failure, and they were still alive at 12-month follow-up.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, preimplantation left ventricular ejection fraction, etiology and mitral regurgitation, a statistically significant interaction was found between the QRS axis and lead location (P=.026). There was a better response with an anterior lead location if the patient had a left QRS axis deviation.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant interaction was found between the lead location and the preimplantation QRS electrical axis, such that there was a better response to resynchronization therapy when the lead was implanted in the anterior interventricular vein if the patient had a left QRS axis deviation.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine whether measurement of the QRS axis can help to predict outcome in patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization therapy.
METHODS: The study included 78 patients who had undergone successful cardiac resynchronization device implantation. Patients were classified as having either a normal QRS axis (i.e., between -30 degrees and +120 degrees) or a left QRS axis deviation (i.e., between -30 degrees and -90 degrees). Patients were regarded as responders if they fulfilled all of the following criteria: their functional class improved by at least one grade, their left ventricular ejection fraction increased by at least 5%, they did not need hospitalization for worsening heart failure, and they were still alive at 12-month follow-up.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age, preimplantation left ventricular ejection fraction, etiology and mitral regurgitation, a statistically significant interaction was found between the QRS axis and lead location (P=.026). There was a better response with an anterior lead location if the patient had a left QRS axis deviation.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant interaction was found between the lead location and the preimplantation QRS electrical axis, such that there was a better response to resynchronization therapy when the lead was implanted in the anterior interventricular vein if the patient had a left QRS axis deviation.
In a collaborative work carried out by the Spanish and Portuguese ISFG Working Group (GEP-ISFG), a polymerase chain reaction multiplex was optimized in order to type ten X-chromosome short tandem repeats (STRs) in a single reaction, including: DXS8378, DXS9902, DXS7132, DXS9898, DXS6809, DXS6789, DXS7133, GATA172D05, GATA31E08, and DXS7423. Using this X-decaplex, each 17 of the participating laboratories typed a population sample of approximately 200 unrelated individuals (100 males and 100 females). In this work, we report the allele frequencies for the ten X-STRs in 15 samples from Argentina (Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Río Negro, Entre Ríos, and Misiones), Brazil (São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Paraná, and Mato Grosso do Sul), Colombia (Antioquia), Costa Rica, Portugal (Northern and Central regions), and Spain (Galicia and Cantabria). Gene diversities were calculated for the ten markers in each population and all values were above 56%. The average diversity per locus varied between 66%, for DXS7133, and 82%, for DXS6809. For this set of STRs, a high discrimination power was obtained in all populations, both in males (> or =1 in 5 x 10(5)) and females (> or =1 in 3 x 10(9)), as well as high mean exclusion chance in father/daughter duos (> or =99.953%) and in father/mother/daughter trios (> or =99.999%). Genetic distance analysis showed no significant differences between northern and central Portugal or between the two Spanish samples from Galicia and Cantabria. Inside Brazil, significant differences were found between Rio de Janeiro and the other three populations, as well as between São Paulo and Paraná. For the five Argentinean samples, significant distances were only observed when comparing Misiones with Entre Ríos and with Río Negro, the only two samples that do not differ significantly from Costa Rica. Antioquia differed from all other samples, except the one from Río Negro.
Qualitative information on the sequence composition of the allele and locus structure of the X-STRs DXS8378, DXS9898, DXS6789, GATA31E08, and GATA172D05 was generated in this study. Sequence data were obtained from chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and diverse human population groups including Africans, Caucasians, Asians, African-Americans, and Hispanics. Results revealed DXS8378 as the most stable locus. On the other hand, DXS9898 and GATA172D05 showed unstable regions identified through chimpanzee-human sequence comparison. At DXS6789, intra-allelic variation was found in all human populations, i.e., alleles with same fragment sizes showed structural differences only detected by sequencing. At the GATA31E08 locus, a previously unreported variation between humans and chimpanzees was identified in an adjacent region upstream from the repeat. This resulted in the addition of two repeat units and the proposal of a new allele nomenclature at this locus. Also, the sequence analyses did not detect ethnic differences between the studied population samples that would justify the use of these markers to help identify ethnic origin in an anthropological context.
A fundamental difficulty in human genetics research is the identification of the spectrum of genetic variants that contribute to the susceptibility to common/complex disorders. We tested here the hypothesis that functional genetic variants may confer susceptibility to several related common disorders. We analyzed five main psychiatric diagnostic categories (substance-abuse, anxiety, eating, psychotic, and mood disorders) and two different control groups, representing a total of 3,214 samples, for 748 promoter and non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 306 genes involved in neurotransmission and/or neurodevelopment. We identified strong associations to individual disorders, such as growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) with anxiety disorders, prolactin regulatory element (PREB) with eating disorders, ionotropic kainate glutamate receptor 5 (GRIK5) with bipolar disorder and several SNPs associated to several disorders, that may represent individual and related disease susceptibility factors. Remarkably, a functional SNP, rs945032, located in the promoter region of the bradykinin receptor B2 gene (BDKRB2) was associated to three disorders (panic disorder, substance abuse, and bipolar disorder), and two additional BDKRB2 SNPs to obsessive-compulsive disorder and major depression, providing evidence for common variants of susceptibility to several related psychiatric disorders. The association of BDKRB2 (odd ratios between 1.65 and 3.06) to several psychiatric disorders supports the view that a common genetic variant could confer susceptibility to clinically related phenotypes, and defines a new functional hint in the pathophysiology of psychiatric diseases.
We describe an especially aggressive case of cribriform-morular variant (C-MV) of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) in a 42-year-old man with familial adenomatous polyposis who died with lung and brain metastases 17 months after thyroidectomy. The angioinvasive neoplasm combined a mixture of trabecular, solid, cribriform, and follicular patterns of growth with CD10+ morules. Follicles were devoid of colloid, and the nuclear features typical of PTC were present in some areas and missing in others. Tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 and, in 40% of the tumoral mass, also were positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin and were negative for thyroglobulin and calcitonin. Strong nuclear staining for beta-catenin was found in all tumor cells, as was positivity for p53 and cyclin D1. In addition to the germline heterozygous APC Ex 2-3 duplication mutation, a somatic homozygous silent p. Thr1493Thr gene variant was found in the neoplastic cells along with RET/PTC rearrangement. This tumor represents the first case of C-MV of PTC showing neuroendocrine differentiation.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Evidence is accumulating regarding the prognostic influence of hyperglycemia in patients with acute ischemic stroke. However, the level associated with poor outcome is unknown. Our objectives were to establish the capillary glucose threshold with the highest predictive accuracy of poor outcome and to evaluate its hypothetical value in influencing functional outcome by adjusting for other well-known prognostic factors in acute stroke.
METHODS: The authors conducted a multicenter, prospective, and observational cohort study of 476 patients with ischemic stroke within less than 24 hours from stroke onset. Capillary finger-prick glucose and stroke severity were determined on admission and 3 times a day during the first 48 hours. Poor outcome (modified Rankin Scale >2) was evaluated at 3 months.
RESULTS: The receiver operating characteristic curves showed the predictive value of maximum capillary glucose at any time within the first 48 hours with an area under the curve of 0.656 (95% CI, 0.592 to 0.720; P<0.01) and pointed to 155 mg/dL as the optimal cutoff level for poor outcome at 3 months (53% sensitivity; 73% specificity). This point was associated with a 2.7-fold increase (95% CI, 1.42 to 5.24) in the odds of poor outcome after adjustment for age, diabetes, capillary glucose on admission, infarct volume, and baseline stroke severity and with a 3-fold increase in the risk of death at 3 months (hazard ratio, 3.80; 95% CI, 1.79 to 8.10).
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperglycemia >or=155 mg/dL at any time within the first 48 hours from stroke onset, and not only the isolated value of admission glycemia, is associated with poor outcome independently of stroke severity, infarct volume, diabetes, or age.
PURPOSE: Machine learning techniques were used to identify which of 14 algorithms best predicts the genetic risk for development of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) in patients who are experiencing primary rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RD).
METHOD: Data from a total of 196 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 30 candidate genes were used. The genotypic profile of 138 patients with PVR following primary rhegmatogenous RD and 312 patients without PVR RD were analyzed. Machine learning techniques were used to develop statistical predictive models. Fourteen models were assessed. Their reproducibility was evaluated by an internal cross-validation method.
RESULTS: The three best predictive models were the lineal kernel based on the Support Vector Machine (SMV), the radial kernel based on the SVM, and the Random Forest. Accuracy values were 78.4%, 70.3%, and 69.3%, respectively. The more accurate, although complex, algorithm uses 42 SNPs, whereas the simpler one uses only two SNPs, which makes them more suitable for routine diagnostic work. The radial kernel based on SVM uses 10 SNPs. The best individually predictor marker was rs2229094 in the tumor necrosis factor locus.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variables may be useful to predict the likelihood of the development of PVR. The predictive capabilities of these models are as good as those observed with clinical approaches. These results need external validation to estimate the true predictive capability and select the most appropriate ones for clinical use.
To elucidate the role of the prostaglandin synthase cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and the mechanisms of dopaminergic (DA) neurodegeneration, monkeys were injected subacutely or chronically (n = 5/group) with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine. Chronically treated animals developed parkinsonian signs and were killed 6 months after the last treatment; tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing neurons decreased in all substantia nigra (SN) cell groups in both treatment groups. In untreated controls (n = 3), there was low Cox-2 expression in ventral SN DA neurons and high expression in ventral tegmental area neurons. In subacutely treated monkeys, Cox-2 expression increased in surviving DA cells, particularly in the ventrolateral SN. In chronically treated monkeys, enhanced Cox-2 expression appeared only in surviving ventral tegmental area and ventral SN neurons. Thus increased Cox-2 did not persist in other SN neurons after discontinuing 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,36-tetrahydropyridine. Some DA neurons in treated but not control monkeys expressed the active nuclear form of phospho-c-Jun, but not the active form of nuclear factor-kappaB. We conclude that Cox-2 expression does not confer vulnerability to neurodegeneration in DA neurons and that it is unlikely that a subacute insult to DA neurons can perpetuate degeneration through Cox-2 activation. Other mechanisms, probably through the Jun N-terminal kinase cascade, lead to DA cell death in this model.
